---
layout: article
title: Introduction to MFC Programming with Visual C++ Version 6.x by Marshall Brain
---

## Introduction to MFC

Visual C++ is much more than a compiler. It is a complete application
development environment that, when used as intended, lets you fully
exploit the object oriented nature of C++ to create professional Windows
applications. In order to take advantage of these features, you need to
understand the C++ programming language. If you have never used C++,
please turn to the C++ tutorials in the [C/C++ Tutorials
page](http://devcentral.iftech.com/learning/tutorials/subcpp.asp) for an
introduction. You must then understand the Microsoft Foundation Class
(MFC) hierarchy. This class hierarchy encapsulates the user interface
portion of the Windows API, and makes it significantly easier to create
Windows applications in an object oriented way. This hierarchy is
available for and compatible with all versions of Windows. The code you
create in MFC is extremely portable.

These tutorials introduce the fundamental concepts and vocabulary behind
MFC and event driven programming. In this tutorial you will enter,
compile, and run a simple MFC program using Visual C++. Tutotial 2
provides a detailed explanation of the code used in Tutorial 1. Tutorial
3 discusses MFC controls and their customization. Tutorial 4 covers
message maps, which let you handle events in MFC.

### What is the Microsoft Foundations Class Library?

Let\'s say you want to create a Windows application. You might, for
example, need to create a specialized text or drawing editor, or a
program that finds files on a large hard disk, or an application that
lets a user visualize the interrelationships in a big data set. Where do
you begin?

A good starting place is the design of the user interface. First, decide
what the user should be able to do with the program and then pick a set
of user interface objects accordingly. The Windows user interface has a
number of standard controls, such as buttons, menus, scroll bars, and
lists, that are already familiar to Windows users. With this in mind,
the programmer must choose a set of controls and decide how they should
be arranged on screen. A time-honored procedure is to make a rough
sketch of the proposed user interface (by tradition on a napkin or the
back of an envelope) and play with the elements until they feel right.
For small projects, or for the early prototyping phase of a larger
project, this is sufficient.

The next step is to implement the code. When creating a program for any
Windows platform, the programmer has two choices: C or C++. With C, the
programmer codes at the level of the Windows Application Program
Interface (API). This interface consists of a collection of hundreds of
C functions described in the Window\'s API Reference books. For
Window\'s NT, the API is typically referred to as the \"Win32 API,\" to
distinguish it from the original 16-bit API of lower-level Windows
products like Windows 3.1.

Microsoft also provides a C++ library that sits on top of any of the
Windows APIs and makes the programmer\'s job easier. Called the
Microsoft Foundation Class library (MFC), this library\'s primary
advantage is efficiency. It greatly reduces the amount of code that must
be written to create a Windows program. It also provides all the
advantages normally found in C++ programming, such as inheritance and
encapsulation. MFC is portable, so that, for example, code created under
Windows 3.1 can move to Windows NT or Windows 95 very easily. MFC is
therefore the preferred method for developing Windows applications and
will be used throughout these tutorials.

When you use MFC, you write code that creates the necessary user
interface controls and customizes their appearance. You also write code
that responds when the user manipulates these controls. For example, if
the user clicks a button, you want to have code in place that responds
appropriately. It is this sort of event-handling code that will form the
bulk of any application. Once the application responds correctly to all
of the available controls, it is finished.

You can see from this discussion that the creation of a Windows program
is a straightforward process when using MFC. The goal of these tutorials
is to fill in the details and to show the techniques you can use to
create professional applications as quickly as possible. The Visual C++
application development environment is specifically tuned to MFC, so by
learning MFC and Visual C++ together you can significantly increase your
power as an application developer.

### Windows Vocabulary

The vocabulary used to talk about user interface features and software
development in Windows is basic but unique. Here we review a few
definitions to make discussion easier for those who are new to the
environment.

Windows applications use several standard user controls:

-   Static text labels
-   Push buttons
-   List boxes
-   Combo boxes (a more advanced form of list)
-   Radio boxes
-   Check boxes
-   Editable text areas (single and multi-line)
-   Scroll bars

You can create these controls either in code or through a \"resource
editor\" that can create dialogs and the controls inside of them. In
this set of tutorials we will examine how to create them in code. See
the tutorials on the AppWizard and ClassWizard on the [MFC Tutorials
page](http://devcentral.iftech.com/learning/tutorials/submfc.asp) for an
introduction to the resource editor for dialogs.

Windows supports several types of application windows. A typical
application will live inside a \"frame window\". A frame window is a
fully featured main window that the user can re-size, minimize, maximize
to fill the screen, and so on. Windows also supports two types of dialog
boxes: modal and modeless. A modal dialog box, once on the screen,
blocks input to the rest of the application until it is answered. A
modeless dialog box can appear at the same time as the application and
seems to \"float above\" it to keep from being overlaid.

Most simple Windows applications use a Single Document Interface, or
SDI, frame. The Clock, PIF editor, and Notepad are examples of SDI
applications. Windows also provides an organizing scheme called the
Multiple Document Interface, or MDI for more complicated applications.
The MDI system allows the user to view multiple documents at the same
time within a single instance of an application. For example, a text
editor might allow the user to open multiple files simultaneously. When
implemented with MDI, the application presents a large application
window that can hold multiple sub-windows, each containing a document.
The single main menu is held by the main application window and it
applies to the top-most window held within the MDI frame. Individual
windows can be iconified or expanded as desired within the MDI frame, or
the entire MDI frame can be minimized into a single icon on the desktop.
The MDI interface gives the impression of a second desktop out on the
desktop, and it goes a long way towards organizing and removing window
clutter.

Each application that you create will use its own unique set of
controls, its own menu structure, and its own dialog boxes. A great deal
of the effort that goes into creating any good application interface
lies in the choice and organization of these interface objects. Visual
C++, along with its resource editors, makes the creation and
customization of these interface objects extremely easy.

### Event-driven Software and Vocabulary

All window-based GUIs contain the same basic elements and all operate in
the same way. On screen the user sees a group of windows, each of which
contains controls, icons, objects and such that are manipulated with the
mouse or the keyboard. The interface objects seen by the user are the
same from system to system: push buttons, scroll bars, icons, dialog
boxes, pull down menus, etc. These interface objects all work the same
way, although some have minor differences in their \"look and feel.\"
For example, scroll bars look slightly different as you move from
Windows to the Mac to Motif, but they all do the same thing.

From a programmer\'s standpoint, the systems are all similar in concept,
although they differ radically in their specifics. To create a GUI
program, the programmer first puts all of the needed user interface
controls into a window. For example, if the programmer is trying to
create a simple program such as a Fahrenheit to Celsius converter, then
the programmer selects user interface objects appropriate to the task
and displays them on screen. In this example, the programmer might let
the user enter a temperature in an editable text area, display the
converted temperature in another un-editable text area, and let the user
exit the program by clicking on a push-button labeled \"quit\".

As the user manipulates the application\'s controls, the program must
respond appropriately. The responses are determined by the user\'s
actions on the different controls using the mouse and the keyboard. Each
user interface object on the screen will respond to events differently.
For example, if the user clicks the Quit button, the button must update
the screen appropriately, highlighting itself as necessary. Then the
program must respond by quitting. Normally the button manages its
appearance itself, and the program in some way receives a message from
the button that says, \"The quit button was pressed. Do something about
it.\" The program responds by exiting.

Windows follows this same general pattern. In a typical application you
will create a main window and place inside it different user interface
controls. These controls are often referred to as child windows-each
control is like a smaller and more specialized sub-window inside the
main application window. As the application programmer, you manipulate
the controls by sending messages via function calls, and they respond to
user actions by sending messages back to your code.

If you have never done any \"event-driven\" programming, then all of
this may seem foreign to you. However, the event-driven style of
programming is easy to understand. The exact details depend on the
system and the level at which you are interfacing with it, but the basic
concepts are similar. In an event-driven interface, the application
paints several (or many) user interface objects such as buttons, text
areas, and menus onto the screen. Now the application waits-typically in
a piece of code called an event loop-for the user to do something. The
user can do anything to any of the objects on screen using either the
mouse or the keyboard. The user might click one of the buttons, for
example. The mouse click is called an event. Event driven systems define
events for user actions such as mouse clicks and keystrokes, as well as
for system activities such as screen updating.

At the lowest level of abstraction, you have to respond to each event in
a fair amount of detail. This is the case when you are writing normal C
code directly to the API. In such a scenario, you receive the
mouse-click event in some sort of structure. Code in your event loop
looks at different fields in the structure, determines which user
interface object was affected, perhaps highlights the object in some way
to give the user visual feedback, and then performs the appropriate
action for that object and event. When there are many objects on the
screen the application becomes very large. It can take quite a bit of
code simply to figure out which object was clicked and what to do about
it.

Fortunately, you can work at a much higher level of abstraction. In MFC,
almost all these low-level implementation details are handled for you.
If you want to place a user interface object on the screen, you create
it with two lines of code. If the user clicks on a button, the button
does everything needed to update its appearance on the screen and then
calls a pre-arranged function in your program. This function contains
the code that implements the appropriate action for the button. MFC
handles all the details for you: You create the button and tell it about
a specific handler function, and it calls your function when the user
presses it. Tutorial 4 shows you how to handle events using message maps

### An Example

One of the best ways to begin understanding the structure and style of a
typical MFC program is to enter, compile, and run a small example. The
listing below contains a simple \"hello world\" program. If this is the
first time you\'ve seen this sort of program, it probably will not make
a lot of sense initially. Don\'t worry about that. We will examine the
code in detail in the next tutorial. For now, the goal is to use the
Visual C++ environment to create, compile and execute this simple
program.
```c
    //hello.cpp

    #include <afxwin.h>

    // Declare the application class
    class CHelloApp : public CWinApp
    {
    public:      
      virtual BOOL InitInstance();
    };

    // Create an instance of the application class
    CHelloApp HelloApp;

    // Declare the main window class
    class CHelloWindow : public CFrameWnd
    {        
      CStatic* cs;
    public:      
      CHelloWindow();
    };

    // The InitInstance function is called each
    // time the application first executes.
    BOOL CHelloApp::InitInstance()
    {        
      m_pMainWnd = new CHelloWindow();       
      m_pMainWnd->ShowWindow(m_nCmdShow);     
      m_pMainWnd->UpdateWindow();     
      return TRUE;
    }

    // The constructor for the window class
    CHelloWindow::CHelloWindow()
    {        
      // Create the window itself        
      Create(NULL,               
        "Hello World!",                
        WS_OVERLAPPEDWINDOW,             
        CRect(0,0,200,200));     
      // Create a static label       
      cs = new CStatic();        
      cs->Create("hello world",             
        WS_CHILD|WS_VISIBLE|SS_CENTER,               
        CRect(50,80,150,150),                
        this);
    }
```
This small program does three things. First, it creates an \"application
object.\" Every MFC program you write will have a single application
object that handles the initialization details of MFC and Windows. Next,
the application creates a single window on the screen to act as the main
application window. Finally, inside that window the application creates
a single static text label containing the words \"hello world\". We will
look at this program in detail in the next tutorial to gain a complete
understanding of its structure.

The steps necessary to enter and compile this program are
straightforward. If you have not yet installed Visual C++ on your
machine, do so now. You will have the option of creating standard and
custom installations. For the purposes of these tutorials a standard
installation is suitable and after answering two or three simple
questions the rest of the installation is quick and painless.

The compilation instructions supplied here apply specifically to Visual
C++ version 6.x under Windows NT or Windows 95. If you are using Visual
C++ version 1.5, 2.x, 4.x or 5.x then you will want to see the tutorials
for these versions on the [MFC Tutorials
page](http://devcentral.iftech.com/learning/tutorials/submfc.asp).

Start VC++ by double clicking on its icon in the Visual C++ group of the
Program Manager. If you have just installed the product, you will see an
empty window with a menu bar. If VC++ has been used before on this
machine, it is possible for it to come up in several different states
because VC++ remembers and automatically reopens the project and files
in use the last time it exited. What we want right now is a state where
it has no project or code loaded. If the program starts with a dialog
that says it was unable to find a certain file, clear the dialog by
clicking the \"No\" button. Go to the **Window** menu and select the
**Close All** option if it is available. Go to the **File** menu and
select the **Close** option if it is available to close any remaining
windows. Now you are at the proper starting point. If you have just
installed the package, you will see a window that looks something like
this:

![](intro2.gif){width="500" height="367"}

This screen can be rather intimidating the first time you see it. To
eliminate some of the intimidation, click on the lower of the two \"x\"
buttons (![](killit.gif){width="18" height="16"}) that you see in the
upper right hand corner of the screen if it is available. This action
will let you close the \"InfoViewer Topic\" window. If you want to get
rid of the InfoViewer toolbar as well, you can drag it so it docks
somewhere along the side of the window, or close it and later get it
back by choosing the **Customize** option in the **Tools** menu.

What you see now is \"normal\". Along the top is the menu bar and
several toolbars. Along the left side are all of the topics available
from the on-line book collection (you might want to explore by double
clicking on several of the items you see there - the collection of
information found in the on-line books is gigantic). Along the bottom is
a status window where various messages will be displayed.

Now what? What you would like to do is type in the above program,
compile it and run it. Before you start, switch to the File Manager (or
the MS-DOS prompt) and make sure your drive has at least five megabytes
of free space available. Then take the following steps.

### Creating a Project and Compiling the Code

In order to compile any code in Visual C++, you have to create a
*project*. With a very small program like this the project seems like
overkill, but in any real program the project concept is quite useful. A
project holds three different types of information:

1.  It remembers all of the source code files that combine together to
    create one executable. In this simple example, the file HELLO.CPP
    will be the only source file, but in larger applications you often
    break the code up into several different files to make it easier to
    understand (and also to make it possible for several people to work
    on it simultaneously). The project maintains a list of the different
    source files and compiles all of them as necessary each time you
    want to create a new executable.
2.  It remembers compiler and linker options particular to this specific
    application. For example, it remembers which libraries to link into
    the executable, whether or not you want to use pre-compiled headers,
    and so on.
3.  It remembers what type of project you wish to build: a console
    application, a windows application, etc.

If you are familiar with makefiles, then it is easy to think of a
project as a machine-generated makefile that has a very
easy-to-understand user interface to manipulate it. For now we will
create a very simple project file and use it to compile HELLO.CPP.

To create a new project for HELLO.CPP, choose the **New** option in the
**File** menu. Under the **Projects** tab, highlight **Win32
Application**. In the Location field type an appropriate path name or
click the Browse button. Type the word \"hello\" in for the project
name, and you will see that word echoed in the Location field as well.
Click the OK button. In the next window, use the default selection \"An
empty project\", click \"Finish\", then click \"OK\" once more in the
next window. Notice there is an option for the typical \"Hello World\"
application, however it skips a few important steps you are about to
take. Visual C++ will create a new subdirectory named HELLO and place
the project files named HELLO.OPT, HELLO.NCB, HELLO.DSP, and HELLO.DSW
in that directory. If you quit and later want to reopen the project,
double-click on HELLO.DSW.

The area along the left side of the screen will now change so that three
tabs are available. The InfoView tab is still there, but there is now
also a ClassView and a FileView tab. The ClassView tab will show you a
list of all of the classes in your application and the FileView tab
gives you a list of all of the files in the project.

Now it is time to type in the code for the program. In the **File** menu
select the **New** option to create a new editor window. In the dialog
that appears, make sure the **Files** tab is active and request a \"C++
Source File\". Make sure the \"Add to Project\" option is checked for
Project \"hello\", and enter \"hello\" for \"File name\". Visual C++
comes with its own intelligent C++ editor, and you will use it to enter
the program shown above. Type (copy/paste) the code in the listing into
the editor window. You will find that the editor automatically colors
different pieces of text such as comments, key words, string literals,
and so on. If you want to change the colors or turn the coloring off, go
to the **Options** option in the **Tools** menu, choose the **Format**
tab and select the **Source Windows** option from the left hand list. If
there is some aspect of the editor that displeases you, you may be able
to change it using the **Editor** tab of the **Options** dialog.

After you have finished entering the code, save the file by selecting
the **Save** option in the **File** menu. Save it to a file named
HELLO.CPP in the new directory Visual C++ created.

In the area on the left side of the screen, click the FileView tab and
expand the tree on the icon labeled \"hello files\", then expand the
tree on the folder icon labeled \"Source Files\". You will see the file
named HELLO.CPP. Click on the ClassView tab and expand the \"hello
classes\" tree and you will see the classes in the application. You can
remove a file from a project at any time by going to the FileView,
clicking the file, and pressing the delete button.

*Finally, **you must now tell the project to use the MFC library**. If
you omit this step the project will not link properly, and the error
messages that the linker produces will not help one bit.* Choose the
**Settings** option in the **Project** menu. Make sure that the
**General** tab is selected in the tab at the top of the dialog that
appears. In the **Microsoft Foundation Classes** combo box, choose the
third option: \"Use MFC in a Shared DLL.\" Then close the dialog.

Having created the project file and adjusted the settings, you are ready
to compile the HELLO.CPP program. In the **Build** menu you will find
three different compile options:

1.  Compile HELLO.CPP (only available if the text window for HELLO.CPP
    has focus)
2.  Build HELLO.EXE
3.  Rebuild All

The first option simply compiles the source file listed and forms the
object file for it. This option does not perform a link, so it is useful
only for quickly compiling a file to check for errors. The second option
compiles all of the source files in the project that have been modified
since the last build, and then links them to form an executable. The
third option recompiles all of the source files in the project and
relinks them. It is a \"compile and link from scratch\" option that is
useful after you change certain compiler options or move to a different
platform.

In this case, choose the **Build HELLO.EXE** option in the **Build**
menu to compile and link the code. Visual C++ will create a new
subdirectory named Debug and place the executable named HELLO.EXE in
that new subdirectory. This subdirectory holds all disposable (easily
recreated) files generated by the compiler, so you can delete this
directory when you run short on disk space without fear of losing
anything important.

If you see compiler errors, simply double click on the error message in
the output window. The editor will take you to that error. Compare your
code against the code above and fix the problem. If you see a mass of
linker errors, it probably means that you specified the project type
incorrectly in the dialog used to create the project. You may want to
simply delete your new directory and recreate it again following the
instructions given above exactly.

To execute the program, choose the **Execute HELLO.EXE** option in the
**Build** menu. A window appears with the words \"hello world\". The
window itself has the usual decorations: a title bar, re-size areas,
minimize and maximize buttons, and so on. Inside the window is a static
label displaying the words \"hello world\". Note that the program is
complete. You can move the window, re-size it, minimize it, and cover
and uncover it with other windows. With a very small amount of code you
have created a complete Window application. This is one of the many
advantages of using MFC. All the details are handled elsewhere.

To terminate the program, click on its system menu (the small box to the
left of the title bar) and select the Close option.

### Conclusion

In this tutorial you have successfully compiled and executed your first
program. You will use these same steps for each of the programs you
create in the following tutorials. You will find that you can either
create a separate directory for each project that you create, or you can
create a single project file and then add and remove different source
files.

In the next tutorial, we will examine this program in detail so you may
gain a more complete understanding of its structure.
